[THEME MUSIC]
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam
Inspirations," coming to you
from our beautiful Los Angeles
studio.
Welcome.
So let me ask you a question.
Do you sneak candy bars
and then hide the wrappers?
Or do you crave your first
morning cup of coffee,
and you basically can't
function without it?
Or do you need that after work
drink so that you can relax?
Well, joining me is
Dr. Hyla Cass, a board
certified psychiatrist
and one of the country's
foremost experts on
integrative medicine.
Dr. Cass combines the best
of alternative medicine
with modern science
in her books,
and an incredible
clinical practice
that's very progressive.
She's helped thousands of people
replace prescription drugs
with specific
nutrients that help
us maybe get off of
those prescription drugs
or taper them down a bit.
She's joining us to share
her secrets from her book
"The Addicted Brain."
Welcome to the show.
Thank you for being here.
Oh, I'm so happy to be here.
So tell me a little bit
about integrative medicine.
What is that exactly?
Integrative medicine is taking
the whole person in mind.
It's the mind, body, and spirit.
We're integrated.
We're all of that.
And it's also integrating
east and west.
It's the best of
all possible worlds.
Conventional medicine,
traditional medicine,
and functional medicine.
Functional medicine
is like looking
under the hood of a car,
really seeing what's going on.
Not just addressing
the symptoms.
Well, what's the
difference between that
and alternative-- Western
medicine, so to speak?
Like a regular MD.
Which you are also.
-I am.
I went to medical school.
I delivered babies, did surgery.
Very fun, actually.
I've really enjoyed that.
However, what
conventional medicine does
is treat symptoms.
Oh, you have high
blood pressure?
We'll give you blood
pressure pills.
You have a rapid heart rate?
We'll give you something
to slow your heart rate.
But nobody there is looking
at the entire picture.
What's the root cause?
What's going on there?
Takes a lot more patience
to really get under the hood
and look at the root
cause, because it could
be so many different things.
It does take a lot of patience.
And on the patient's
part, it takes time.
And we want that quick fix.
We want that
solution right away.
Fix me.
Fix me, doc.
And it takes a while
to really get to,
what is the systemic problem
that's going on that's broken?
That's exactly right.
People tend to want
a magic bullet,
but the only thing is the
magic bullet doesn't work.
So after people have gone
through a lot of magic bullets
that weren't so
magic, they come to me
LISA GARR: Come to you.
And then we work as partners.
And it's great.
I may be the expert, but the
patient has to participate.
So how many people come to you
that are on prescription drugs?
Most of them.
And then the ones who aren't
have been given prescriptions
or recommend-- it's
been recommended
that they take prescriptions.
And they come to me saying, I
don't want prescription drugs.
LISA GARR: Because--
I've read about
the side effects,
or my friend, or my
this and that-- I've
seen the ravages of medications.
I want to do it naturally.
And there is such a movement,
and such a wonderful movement
thanks to people like you
of informed people who
want to do things differently.
So people come to you that
are already on their path.
They know a little
bit about nutrition.
They want to feel
fabulous all the time.
HYLA CASS: Yes.
-Mm-hm.
That's what you're
really good at.
I know this about you,
because you have helped
me with many different things.
You're really an expert in
hormones too, which we're going
to talk about in a little bit.
But first of all, let's get
to "The Addicted Brain."
Why is the brain--
and why do you
call it "The Addicted
Brain" rather
than the addictive personality?
Because it's not
your personality.
It's your actual
brain biochemistry.
And people get
down on themselves,
feeling that they're weak
or they're a bad person.
If they were only
a better person,
they wouldn't be addicted
to sugar, caffeine,
cocaine, donuts, whatever.
And it's not that.
It's the chemistry.
LISA GARR: So you really
put sugar and cocaine
and caffeine all in
the same category?
Mm-hm.
[LAUGHTER]
It looks that way, the same?
Some's legal, some's illegal,
but it's all the same.
It's all the same in the brain?
Yeah.
The brain just wants-- the
brain wants what it wants.
The brain wants to feel good.
We want to feel good.
And so if caffeine
is handy, do that.
If sugar is what we can
get, we'll get that.
Cocaine-- it's whatever people
can get hold of because there's
such a need for us to feel OK.
LISA GARR: And what
part of the brain
gets stimulated when it
goes after those highs?
HYLA CASS: Well, it's
really the entire brain.
But it's the limbic system,
the emotional system.
And then it's also related to
the cortex, which is the part
that thinks and processes.
But really it's
a very primitive,
almost a survival mechanism.
Very often, what's
going on is people are--
for example, low blood sugar.
So they're grabbing
for whatever it is.
Because the brain
gives you this message.
Danger, danger.
Because if we don't have glucose
flowing into our brain cells,
then we could die.
LISA GARR: Interesting.
And so is that what
low blood sugar is?
It's really the glucose
completely depleting
itself from the blood cells?
Hm.
-Yeah.
Interesting.
That's why you go for that
whatever isn't nailed down--
HYLA CASS: Whatever.
That's why I recommend eating
regularly to prevent that.
LISA GARR: OK.
So let's talk
about-- so the brain.
It gets into-- the chemistry of
the brain needs to feel good.
It wants to feel good, so it's
going to reach for those things
that feel good.
What are some of the myths
around addiction, if you will?
Some of the common myths.
Well, it runs in my family.
That's one of-- oh,
it runs in my family.
My father, my mother,
my sister, my brother.
Whatever it is.
So I am going to be an addict.
Well, the truth
of it is you will
have the propensity
because the genetics
will show up in your own body.
However, you're not a
slave to your genes.
Isn't that nice?
LISA GARR: That's fascinating.
Isn't that cool?
LISA GARR: And that's great.
That's great.
So what about an addiction
is the sign of a weakness
or a moral character?
That's one of the myths
that you have in your book.
Yes?
No?
HYLA CASS: It's not--
you're not a weak person.
You're not stupid.
You're not immoral.
You are just human.
And you're going after
what we see as survival.
The way people like myself
think is, its survival.
You want to feel-- first of
all, you want to feel good.
But also, if you are, for
example, low blood sugar or low
in certain chemicals
in your brain,
you're going to
go after whatever
it takes to make those
brain chemicals go
up so that you feel normal.
LISA GARR: OK.
So another myth, which you
say, which is very important,
that chronic addiction is a
disease that can be treated
with prescription drugs.
Is that how people get into
that pathway in the first place?
HYLA CASS: Well,
there's two issues here.
One of them is that
very often when
people go into an addiction
treatment facility,
they're given prescription
drugs in order to come
off of the addictive substance.
And I don't think
that's such a good idea.
Sometimes it's urgent and
you really need to do that.
But I've also had people
withdraw using the right diet,
the right supplements
that'll get the brain
chemistry working properly.
And so there wasn't
really a need
for meds because it's a slippery
slope, as you can imagine.
LISA GARR: I can imagine.
Right.
So you mention different
amino acids that might
be able to help with balancing.
What is the idea?
You're trying to
balance the blood sugar?
HYLA CASS: Well, blood
sugar is part of it,
and brain chemistry
overall is part of it.
A lot goes into
making a brain cell
and in making your mood
good, happy, up, OK?
So we need glucose,
which is carb.
We need the glucose.
We need protein to
make the amino acids.
So we need these amino acids.
So sometimes we're deficient
in the amino acids.
And we need fats.
And that's a really
important component.
So when you have a zero
fat diet or a really
low fat diet, not so good.
And when I say fats,
I don't mean, like,
eat a lot of French fries.
LISA GARR: Right.
You mean--
-Sorry, honey.
-No, you mean the good fats.
-I mean the good fats.
I got that.
Hopefully we know that much.
All right.
Another myth that
drugs and alcohol
are a case of substance abuse.
What do you mean by that?
Drugs and alcohol are-- oh, are
the cause of substance abuse.
HYLA CASS: Well,
drugs and alcohol
can cause-- actually,
if you start using them,
you will actually perpetuate
that because you're going
to change your brain chemistry.
But very often, it's also
something you're born with.
And that is a propensity to be
low in certain neurochemicals.
For example, there's
something called Reward
Deficiency Syndrome, RDS.
And when you have reward
deficiency syndrome,
you're chronically
low in dopamine.
And dopamine is
the neurochemical,
the neurotransmitter, the
chemical messenger that
makes you feel, hey, motivated.
Hi, good.
Happy, ready to go.
When you don't have
enough dopamine,
you're kind of low and
tired and you have ADD.
OK?
So it runs in families.
And there's a solution.
I mean, one solution
is gambling,
dangerous behaviors
like little boys
who jump up-- jump off roofs.
LISA GARR: In order
to get the dopamine--
They want to get
the dopamine doing.
Release in the brain.
OK.
But we have much better
ways, much healthier
ways to raise dopamine.
And one of them is to take
what are called precursors.
We take more of the amino
acids that make dopamine.
LISA GARR: That makes
a lot more sense.
So it's a combination
of amino acids
that create more dopamine
production in the brain.
HYLA CASS: Yeah.
Because we are chemical.
Now we're mind,
body, and spirit,
so that's not to say we
don't have a spiritual aspect
and that we don't have choice.
Of course we have choice and we
have-- there's a lot going on.
But I'm simply talking
about the chemist--
we're also a chemistry set.
So let's give this
chemistry set all
the raw materials that it needs
in order to function optimally.
LISA GARR: And you
can literally get
somebody off of a heavy
addiction with doing this.
And you literally have.
HYLA CASS: I have.
Yeah, I have.
And it sounds like, oh no.
You really need the
heavy artillery.
And the truth is, you don't.
Like, even for
example, we're talking
about addiction, but also
with depression, with anxiety.
It's not the heavy artillery.
It's just the right
substance, the right product.
LISA GARR: And
specifically, I mean, I
opened the show
talking about candy
bars and caffeine and alcohol.
And so for-- I mean, we
could also be talking
about the lighter things here.
So if you're looking to get
rid of those carb addictions,
what types of things
can you replace?
Or what is the body looking
for that's addicted to carbs?
What is the brain looking
for, I should ask?
The brain's
looking for glucose.
LISA GARR: OK.
Again.
HYLA CASS: We have very
hungry brain cells.
These brain cells use up
20% of the body's glucose.
Can you imagine That
this little brain.
It's, like, this big.
Weighs three pounds
on a good day.
Three pounds.
And it's like jelly.
And it's a very hungry organ.
So when it is low in sugar
or glucose, you feel yucky.
You're tired.
You can't think straight.
You have brain fog.
LISA GARR: And then
what about when
you put stress on that brain
and you make it overactive?
Then it becomes more-- phew.
You've lowered your
blood sugar even more.
And what happens is the
stress hormones comes out.
The adrenali--
LISA GARR: Cortisol
and all that.
Uh-huh.
HYLA CASS: The cortisol.
You got it.
So the stress hormones come
out because they're saying,
oh, there's an emergency here.
The blood sugar is too low.
We need to make this better.
So it goes-- chu!
They come out.
These chemicals come
out and they make
your cells release more sugar.
Sugar goes into the bloodstream.
And then the pancreas,
the sig-- oh,
there's all sorts of signals
going on in the body.
The pancreas says, oh, hey.
There's too much sugar
hanging around here.
This isn't good.
And it ships some insulin
into the bloodstream.
LISA GARR: And
what does that do?
And the insulin
goes for the sugar.
Goes chu, to the glucose,
and pulls it into the cells.
OK.
HYLA CASS: To make it-- to keep
the-- because we don't want--
So it spikes the insulin.
OK.
HYLA CASS: Spikes-- we
get a spike of sugar,
and then we get a
spike of insulin.
Goes into the cell.
But what's often happening is
called reactive hypoglycemia.
Reactive hypoglycemia.
So you start off with
very high blood sugar.
The insulin comes, drip.
Takes it away.
And you end up with
low blood sugar.
And then you have the
cycle all over again.
And then you're feeling like,
oh, I don't feel so good.
I need-- I need
another candy bar.
LISA GARR: That's why
you go for after--
if you have a lot of stress,
you go for something sugary.
You go for another
cup of coffee.
You go for the sugary drinks.
Alcohol has a lot of
sugar in it as well.
HYLA CASS: That's exactly right.
I mean, so much of alcoholism
is actually low blood sugar.
LISA GARR: Isn't that
interesting, right?
And also, as you
explained, the lack
of production of sufficient
dopamine and serotonin
in the brain, which could
either happen because of
stress-- which, OK.
So now let's back it
up a little bit here.
What can we do if we
have stressful lives?
Like, what types of nutrients
can we take in order to combat
this cascade of effects?
Great question.
First of all, avoid
the simple carbs.
The simple carbs are
sugar, white flour.
We kind of know that.
If it's white,
probably you shouldn't
eat it, unless it's a rutabaga.
[LAUGHTER]
Because it spikes the sugar?
-It spikes the blood sugar.
-OK.
And when you have spiked
blood sugar, you're in trouble.
And sugar, by the way,
high levels of blood sugar
cause insulin resistance.
If you keep going through this
cycle over and over again,
you're going to have
insulin resistance.
So after a while,
it's like crying wolf,
and you're not going
to be able to get
that sugar into the cells.
So your blood sugar rises
and it doesn't go down,
and you become pre-diabetic.
And you begin to gain weight.
It's also carcinogenic when
you have a lot of sugar
and you have a lot of
insulin circulating.
That's carcinogenic.
So bottom line is, stay away
from the sugar and white flour.
LISA GARR: I mean, that could
explain the obesity epidemic.
The levels of stress
are, of course,
rising with our
economic situation
and our political
environment and all of that.
I mean, even-- and then
add on the job and the life
and the kids and the work.
So we're in this state of stress
more than we ever have been.
Life is busier and faster
than it ever has been.
HYLA CASS: It's tough.
We have to
stress-proof ourselves.
LISA GARR: OK.
Let's do that.
OK.
Dr. Cass!
OK!
[LAUGH]
Well, this is what I tell
my patients and my readers.
Avoid the bad stuff.
The alcohol, the caffeine,
the sugar, the white flower.
Avoid the bad stuff.
And of course drugs of
abuse and prescriptions
whenever you can avoid them.
And eat a really good,
healthy, natural diet
that's well balanced.
I mentioned earlier, you want
to have complex carbohydrates.
That's carbohydrates
that release slowly.
So that's root vegetables,
for example, whole grains.
LISA GARR: Right.
-You know, the good stuff.
LISA GARR: Good stuff.
So that's the carb.
Then protein.
You want to have
high quality protein.
Chicken, fish.
Meat's OK, just not in excess.
Or if you're a vegetarian, there
are other sources of protein.
And good fats.
Those are all really important.
If you eat that at every meal or
spread it out through the day--
let's say you don't
have fat at one meal.
It's not the end of the world.
But the body kind of likes
that kind of balance.
And the kind of good
fat is, say, fish.
So if you eat salmon a few
times a week, you're doing
your brain a really big favor.
LISA GARR: But see, we
eat like that already,
and we do exercise a little bit.
But yet, the stress or
the environmental factors
are pushing our body
constantly into that zone.
So?
HYLA CASS: So we
need extra help.
We need to bring in
the reinforcements.
LISA GARR: Yes.
So you start with
a basic good--
you have to do the
basic diet, and you
have to do the exercise.
So that's a given.
LISA GARR: OK.
We're giving the fact that
everybody's doing that.
Do that.
-Yeah, we're all doing that.
[LAUGH]
For sure.
Take it to the
next level for us.
You don't sit in front of the
TV eating popcorn all night,
or candy.
Some nights, but
that's all right.
[LAUGH]
-Well--
Yeah, so take it to
the next level for us.
HYLA CASS: The next
level is to have
small, frequent
meals so that you're
not having blood sugar dips.
Because the stress
is going to happen.
Your blood sugar's going
to go shifting around.
So make sure that you have
reinforcements in you.
LISA GARR: OK.
So that's another
piece of the puzzle.
Then another thing to
do is to take vitamins.
A multivitamin is
really, really useful
because it's helping to
restore what you're burning up.
LISA GARR: OK.
And look, our
food supply kind of
is-- even if you're
eating organically,
even the organic food does not
have the level of nutrients
that we had in the old days.
So it should just be in
your diet no matter what.
HYLA CASS: Yeah.
Just take a really
good, high quality,
high potency multivitamin.
LISA GARR: Now you know
about the green juice
movement and all of
the wonderful nutrients
that come in green juices.
Would that be a supplement
in case you're-- I mean,
you don't want to do the multi?
Or do you think in addition
to the green juices--
HYLA CASS: I love green juices.
But I also say, you
know, a little insurance.
LISA GARR: OK.
Because there are trace
minerals and trace vitamins.
There's vitamins and trace
minerals in the vitamin pill
that you may not get
in the green juice.
So that just kind of covers--
you want to cover everything.
We don't have a lot of margin.
LISA GARR: No.
And the flu seasons seem to be
getting more and more intense.
I mean, we're in the middle
of an epidemic right now.
So I think it is important
to give the body extra.
And I think this is just
the way it's going to be.
HYLA CASS: Yeah.
I think so.
They're not getting any
less, these flu seasons.
So they're getting
more and more intense.
So I know that you don't
run towards the flu shot.
What would we run towards
instead to boost the immunity?
Well, all those
things that I said.
And take vitamin C,
extra vitamin C. I have
everybody on two grams a day.
That's 2,000 milligrams.
And take it at two
different times,
because it's fairly
short acting.
So 2,000, like 1,000
here and 1,000 here.
Even better, 500, 500, 500.
But people don't do that.
If you're coming
down with a cold,
take vitamin C to
bowel tolerance.
That is till you
start to feel gassy.
LISA GARR: Yep.
Mm-hm.
OK.
Very-- I mean,
it sounds simple.
But you know, animals
make vitamin C.
We're the only animals,
besides hamsters, that don't.
Isn't that odd?
Us and hamsters.
How do you like that?
Real quickly, what do you
feel about the flu shots?
I know it's off topic here,
but I've got to ask you.
HYLA CASS: Well, the flu
shot is a little tricky,
because they're basing
it on last year's flu.
LISA GARR: OK.
It also can give
you side effects.
You can actually get the flu.
You can get a mild
case of the flu.
LISA GARR: Mild.
Uh-huh.
The other thing is, what do
you think's in the flu vaccine?
You think it's just
simply some killed virus?
Like, please.
It is heavily processed.
Heavily processed.
LISA GARR: Thermasal--
-Thiomersal.
-OK.
Thiomersal.
All kinds of crap.
So the things that you
do not want in your body.
I mean, all these chemicals.
What do you think
they're going to do?
What do you think these
chemicals are going to do?
You think they're going to
just come in and go out?
I don't think so.
So they stay in our body.
LISA GARR: Mercury,
heavy metals.
That's what these
viruses bind to, right?
In order to be in the flu shot.
To process it.
In order to process a flu
shot, in order to make it,
it has to go through
a lot of chemical--
LISA GARR: So I mean, if
people do take the flu shot,
is it better to do it
when you're healthy,
not when you're sick?
HYLA CASS: No, you
should ever do a--
LISA GARR: A flu shot
when you're sick.
Don't take any kind of
[INAUDIBLE] when you're sick.
We're going back
to something else,
and that is that in
kids who are autistic,
there are many cases in
which the child was given
a vaccine when they were sick.
In fact, there are twins.
One kid was sick, one wasn't.
Same genes.
One kid became autistic,
the other didn't.
LISA GARR: Oh, my goodness.
Wow.
And that's interesting.
HYLA CASS: So that's a
little aside, but you know,
it's all part of the mix.
Well, it is important
to know that there
are so many different
additives in these flu shots.
So, OK.
Back to how to boost--
HYLA CASS: Or if you're
going to do a flu shot,
do it when you're healthy.
And then take something
afterwards, a homeopathic,
to help neutralize
the side effects.
LISA GARR: Oh, that's right.
There are-- that's right.
There's a lot of-- OK.
So we were-- thank you
for that, by the way,
because it's very relevant.
So we were talking about
addiction and different myths
of addiction, and so forth.
Another one is that there
has to be a relapse,
that it's part of recovery.
HYLA CASS: Part of recovery.
Yeah, of course you're
going to relapse.
No.
LISA GARR: You don't have to.
No, you don't have to relapse.
I'm telling you that
if you follow lifestyle
recommendations of eating
correctly, taking vitamins,
and then taking very
specific amino acids--
and these are the ones that
help to raise dopamine, to raise
serotonin, raise GABA-- if you
take all of these and fish oil,
my patients don't relapse.
I mean, I hate to say it
like, oh, my patient's don't.
It's not like that.
But I can keep
people-- if they're
well motivated-- the cravings.
You see, they're not going to
be a slave to their cravings.
What happens is
these poor people,
they white knuckle
themselves into sobriety.
And bless them for it.
Bless them for it.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
But it's always a
struggle with the cravings.
And I've had people--
I mean, I had
this one case a few years ago.
This man-- I actually knew him.
He was an acquaintance,
and I said,
I just developed these vitamins.
I'd like you to try them.
Because he was nine months sober
from a really bad meth habit.
So I said, why don't you try
my brain recovery packets?
He says, oh, I
don't need vitamins.
I'm great.
I'm clean and
sober, nine months.
I'm doing great.
Except he didn't have a job
and he was kind of tired.
And I said, humor me.
Try them.
He calls me four days later.
He said, what's in it?
He said, I have my energy.
I'm sleeping right
through the night.
I'm dreaming and
remembering my dreams.
And he actually put in
some job applications
and got a job, which he still
has now several years later.
LISA GARR: So life
can be so much
better with supplementation.
HYLA CASS: So
isn't that amazing?
So he was white
knuckling it, actually.
And he didn't quite realize that
being clean and sober for him,
while it was a wonderful
accomplishment,
could be actually a better--
he could have a better quality
of life than he was getting.
LISA GARR: And
that's interesting.
And I know that you have put
together different formulas
for focus and for-- for
brain recovery and health,
and so forth.
Because I do think that
we live in that world
now, that we live in a
world where we-- our bodies
are taxed more than they were.
HYLA CASS: And we need
to use-- we need to use
chemistry with chemistry.
To assist the chemistry.
Like earlier when
you were saying,
what do you do
about the adrenals,
about stress and about
being stress-proof?
Take adaptogens.
LISA GARR: What are those?
Adaptogens.
They help you adapt.
They help you adapt to stress.
They are God's gift, OK?
They're from the herbal world.
And Western medicine
has no equivalent.
LISA GARR: OK.
OK.
These are-- and it's
ashwagandha, reishi mushroom,
ginseng-- you've
heard of ginseng.
I mean, yeah.
And there's eleuthro,
which is Siberian ginseng.
Rhodiola.
And these are just wonderful,
plant-based compounds.
They literally come from plants.
They're extracts.
And when we take
them, we're getting
a whole lot of nutrition.
LISA GARR: But why
doesn't Western medicine
have an equivalent?
Or why can they not patent
these various nutrients
that come from
the ground, roots?
Well, they can do use
patents, but it's a little bit
hard because there they are.
They're in nature.
They're not manufactured
in a-- plants
aren't manufactured in a plant.
[LAUGH]
LISA GARR: Right.
They're not made by the
pharmaceutical industry.
The pharmaceutical industry
is there to make money.
I mean, that's the truth.
They're not there--
LISA GARR: Interesting
that you would say that.
--because they want to
take care of your health.
I mean, let's face it.
It's business.
It's big business, and we have
to realize that, appreciate
pharmaceuticals for
when we need them,
and don't have any illusions
that they're there to help you.
As a whole, as an industry.
And be aware that when you can't
get something pharmaceutically,
and you can get it
through the health food
store or your health
provider, it's
because it's not patentable.
LISA GARR: Interesting.
So our health food stores become
our new pharmacies, in a sense.
If you know how to use it
the right way-- I mean,
you can go and get
multivitamins off the shelf.
But what you're
talking about here
is different ways to turn on
certain pathways in the body
so that it works optimally.
HYLA CASS: We're giving the
body exactly what it needs.
I don't know how people
go into health food stores
and know what to buy.
LISA GARR: It's confusing.
I get confused.
I go into a health food store--
That's why you're here.
We have actually a video
that I want to show you
that Dr. Cass has done,
talking about some
of these things that
help support our body.
Take a look.
Dr. Cass, in your practice,
you see a great number
of individuals who have been,
for one reason or another,
become addicted to
mood altering drugs.
Can you tell us what you do
to help that individual get
stabilized and then
on long-term to take
care of the kinds of things
that created the need?
Sure.
That's an excellent question.
What happens is people are
put on a mood altering drug.
They're put on an antidepressant
such as Prozac, Zoloft,
Lexapro, Celexa, whatever.
And what happens is when they
try to go off these drugs,
and it's appropriate for
them to go off them--
you really don't want to
be on them your whole life.
When they start to
go off the drug,
they'll find they
have what's called
discontinuation syndrome,
which is basically
like withdrawing from any drug.
When you see heroin
addicts going
through all the terrible--
the sweating, the stomach
aches, and the
really nasty things
they go through, or cocaine
addicts, or any kind of addict.
When they getting off a drug,
what happens is the brain
has already become accustomed
to being a certain way.
And you take away
the substance--
and it can be also
a prescription drug,
one that's written by a doctor.
It could be a stimulant drug.
Adderall, Concerta, Ritalin.
All of these things will
alter your brain receptivity.
And in order for
your brain to get
used to being off
of the drug, you
have to withdraw fairly slowly.
And what's unfortunate is that
many physicians won't do that.
They'll tell someone, oh,
you can just go off the drug.
Or take them off too quickly.
And of course, what happens is
they begin to have symptoms.
And then the doctor
will say, see.
Told you you shouldn't
go off that drug.
You really need it.
You're going to need it
the rest of your life.
And I've heard this so
many times from patients.
And it's simply
because its physiology.
If you take a mood
altering substance
for any length of time,
changes your brain chemistry,
changes how your
receptors are working.
And so you have to
withdraw very, very slowly.
And then what I put in--
this is the difference
where the doctors who practice
nutritional medicine are
different-- is that I
will add in some vitamins
and amino acids and
herbs that help bridge.
So that rather than
depending on that drug,
you begin to replace
what's missing
and to reactivate the
receptors using nutrients.
And so what happens is the
whole process becomes quicker.
It doesn't take you as
long to go off of the drug.
And then the other
thing that happens
is, for example, if somebody's
coming off of an SSRI,
a Serotonin Reuptake
Inhibitor, as I mentioned,
Zoloft, Celexa Lexapro, when
they're going off of that
and I give them a
serotonin enhancer
like 5-Hydroxytryptophan
together with some B
vitamins, that's actually
going to help make serotonin.
So not only is it going to
help bridge that withdrawal,
but when they are
finally off of the drug,
they may need to take
that 5-Hydroxytryptophan
because they may have
their own predisposition.
Everyone's different.
And some people just
need more than others.
And that'll take care
of the initial problem
so that they're not going
to need to be on a drug.
They may need to be on
this amino acid 5-HTP
and they may need to be on
vitamins either for the rest
of their life in
some form or other,
or at least for a
certain amount of time.
But that's great.
I mean, what you're giving is
something natural that the body
is missing and needs.
So it's very interesting
to find out various things
that we can use in order to make
us feel better in order to get
our quality of life back.
I think sometimes when we
go through slow-- slowly
accumulative stress,
we don't realize
that several years later,
we're just feeling horrible.
We think it's normally
the aging process
and that we're
just getting older,
and those types of things.
But you can actually feel
even better as you age, right?
HYLA CASS: Yeah.
It's so-- it's kind
of a sad commentary,
because so many people
are in that position.
They've had a lot of stress,
and they're worn out.
And they're tired,
and they're depressed.
And what happens?
They go to their doctor and
get a prescription for an SSRI.
And that doesn't really
cover the problem.
Doesn't take care of
the problem at all.
And it just gives them
a bunch of side effects.
And we also know from research
that most of the effects
of the SSRIs is placebo effect.
LISA GARR: So what do
you mean, it really
doesn't solve the problem?
Doesn't it--
HYLA CASS: It's not doing
with what the issue is.
Because if you're really
tired like that, what's really
going on is adrenal burnout.
It doesn't mean that your
adrenals have actually burned
out, but it's just a way of--
LISA GARR: A term.
--it's a term where
your cortisol is low.
As it's if it's been
pumping cortisol and pumping
cortisol, and it's finally
just saying, [INAUDIBLE].
That's enough.
You know?
So the switch goes off.
And you're feeling-- you
just don't have your get up
and go anymore.
You think, oh, I'm old.
I'm tired.
It's the end of it.
Or, I'm depressed.
And again, you go
for the prescription.
Or you go for the caffeine.
And what's really going on
is the adrenals need help.
And that's where I really
differ from other physicians,
from conventional docs,
because they come to me,
and I will actually
put them on adaptogens.
I'll even use, by
the way, compounded--
and this is from a compounding
pharmacy-- cortisone.
So it's not prednisone,
which is highly concentrated.
And it's not going to
shut down your adrenals.
It's going to help you adrenal
glands have a better shot.
Is that hydrocortisone,
or same thing, or--
HYLA CASS: Yeah.
-That's the same thing.
So that's a good kickstarter
to get you out of that adrenal
completely fatigue.
But it's not something that
you stay with for a while.
HYLA CASS: You don't
have to stay on forever.
And it's not going
to suppress your own,
and you don't
become hooked on it.
See, the problem with
so many-- with the drugs
is your body gets hooked.
LISA GARR: OK.
Let's talk about
that for a second.
So the serotonin
reuptake inhibitor.
So what that basically means
is pulls the serotonin,
and then it's--
pulls it in the brain
and prevents it from releasing.
How is that not good?
HYLA CASS: Well, what happens
is the serotonin is a messenger.
Here's one cell.
Here's the other cell.
And this cell sends a message.
It sends a little
serotonin molecule.
Do, do, do.
And it does, do, do
through the synapse,
through this liquid, your fluid.
And it goes-- hits
the other cell.
And the other cell says, oh.
That feels good.
You know, there's a receptor
there for the serotonin,
and it feels that.
It gets that serotonin
hit, and it feels happy.
Now ordinarily, that serotonin
molecule will be taken
up by the cell and recycled.
Turned into its components
and whatever happens.
But with SSRIs, it hits
the receptor and the SSRI
prevents it from
being taken up again.
That's why it's called
a reuptake inhibitor.
So it sits around, and it has
a chance to do another hit,
and another hit.
But eventually, you know,
along comes the other scavenger
enzymes like MAO,
Monoamine Oxidase,
and does actually use
up that serotonin.
So eventually-- we know this.
People on antidepressants,
they stop working.
LISA GARR: Right.
Right.
So you have to up
the dose, you have
to add another antidepressant.
You know, all kinds of things.
And it doesn't
solve the problem.
LISA GARR: And then people
want to go cold turkey,
because they don't feel
that they're working
or they're having--
HYLA CASS: Oh, boy.
I see that a lot
too where they just--
I'm off my antidepressants.
And I'm like, what?
[LAUGH]
And what do you notice?
Well, they get very depressed.
Or they cannot function.
HYLA CASS: They can't
function mostly, yeah.
Yeah.
I mean--
HYLA CASS: It's awful.
It's awful.
And then they go to their
doctor, and the doctor says,
see, I told you you had to be
on it for the rest your life.
Ah!
I mean, that is so wrong.
LISA GARR: Yes.
You know, I help people to
get off of antidepressants.
I think that's very important.
If they need them--
I mean, look.
If something's
working and it's OK,
I'm not saying everybody
should get off their drugs.
That's a personal choice,
and it's a whole other story.
But if someone wants to go
off of their medication,
they should have a
trial of going off,
because they may
not need it anymore.
So you gradually lower
the dose while adding
in the supplements.
And I have a program.
You add in the amino acids,
you add in the co-factors,
the vitamins and
minerals that work,
with the amino acids to help
make the neurotransmitters.
Like, you take a
tryptophan or 5-HTP,
and that makes serotonin.
So I'd rather give someone
by 5-HTP or tryptophan
to make more serotonin, to
make those hits, than fooling
the brain into
thinking there's more,
because there's so
many side effects.
LISA GARR: That
makes so much sense.
You have such a great
way of explaining things.
I love it.
You've got, like, a
whole animation going.
[LAUGH]
No, it's great.
Because it takes it out of
those complicated medical terms,
and brings it to a way
that I can picture it.
So taking tryptophan,
taking 5-HTP.
What about the B vitamins?
Do they help in that
process as well?
HYLA CASS: B vitamins are great.
You know, we know that
there's the stress B vitamins.
Because when you're
stressed, the B
vitamins are used to make those
hormones, the stress hormones.
And the stress hormones
are along the same pathway
as your neurotransmitters.
And that's one of the reasons
why when you're really
stressed, your brain hormones,
your brain neurotransmitters,
go south too.
Because you only have
so much raw material.
LISA GARR: Right.
You can't think and
you can switch things.
And you're just not
functioning on all cylinders.
So taking amino acids, you
can take mixed amino acids.
Eat high protein meals.
And then take specific ones.
You know, if you
have a depression--
and I have a questionnaire
here in another book I have,
"Natural Highs,"
that's an older book.
And then there's my
"Addicted Brain" book where
I talk about this as well.
That if you're feeling
depressed but anxious--
you know, you're wired and
you can't sleep at night,
you're eating too many
carbs-- that's pretty
much a serotonin deficiency.
LISA GARR: Ah.
Very good to know.
Call in the 5-HTP.
So 5-HTP, you can get
at the health food store.
You can take it before
you go to sleep.
And what levels do you
recommend for someone who
is not coming off of an SSRI?
HYLA CASS: I'd start
with 50 milligrams.
Go up to 100, 150,
200 milligrams.
I have people on 300
of 5-HTP at bedtime.
Or I have people take
it in the morning.
100 in the morning,
200 at night.
You know, 100 in the
morning and 200 at night.
I have this-- this one woman
was telling me that, she said,
she knows when she forgot to
take her 5-HTP in the morning
when she finds her
husband irritating her.
[LAUGH]
He's irri-- he's more
irritating because she
didn't take her 5-HTP.
That's funny.
She doesn't have
our happiness on.
HYLA CASS: That's exactly.
Is there any side
effect from 5-HTP?
Does it make you tired?
HYLA CASS: It can make
you tired in some people.
And so if it makes you
tired, take it at bedtime.
Otherwise, if you
mix it with an SSRI,
you have to be
careful because you
can have serotonin syndrome,
which is excess of serotonin.
So if someone is
on an SSRI, I have
to take the actual
5-HTP or L-tryptophan
away from it, at least
two hours away from it.
LISA GARR: What's a
sero-- serotonin-- what
did you just mention it was?
HYLA CASS: A serotonin
reuptake inhibitor.
No, the-- too much serotonin.
What--
-Serotonin syndrome.
-Yes.
What is that?
How would you know--
Something you do
not want to have.
Serotonin syndrome is serious.
It occurs when--
usually it's when
you add two drugs together.
LISA GARR: Oh.
Like an SSRI,
and then something
that prevents the
SSRI from breaking
down properly, like something
that's an MAO inhibitor.
So you know when people
are on MAO inhibitors,
they can't take SSRIs because
you can get serotonin syndrome.
LISA GARR: Gets so complicated.
-I know.
LISA GARR: Yes.
Yes.
HYLA CASS: But it's
actually-- it's pretty simple.
So if you're taking anything
that enhances serotonin
and you get too much of it--
and that's not likely to happen
with adding amino acids
to an antidepressant,
but you have to be-- I have
to give people warning--
high blood pressure, you
get a headache, you sweat,
you feel really horrible.
You really notice it.
It's not just something that
you have to sit and worry-- ooh,
do I have serotonin syndrome?
You know when you have it.
And what you do is you
stop taking everything
and you call your doctor.
LISA GARR: OK.
All right.
Good to know.
That's important.
HYLA CASS: And then it stops.
And whatever it is,
it stops the process.
Because, I mean, many
people are hearing
this for the first time.
Now do you think that its ever
a good idea to take an SSRI when
maybe you've had
a death or you're
grieving a loss, or
something for short term.
I've heard that as a
way of introducing--
that doctors introduce
SSRIs into people's lives.
Do you-- or can you really
accomplish the same thing
with this amino acid
combination with the 5-HTP
that you're talking about?
HYLA CASS: Well, this
is such a good point.
Because I can't tell
you how many people
in the grieving process
are given SSRIs and given
tranquilizers.
And what happens?
10, 15, 20 years later,
they're still on them.
Yeah.
I know.
And it's ridiculous,
because they can't get off
the medication, because it's
such a difficult withdrawal
for some of them.
And this is where I come in,
and I really do help people
very gradually to get
off of these medications
with these supplements.
I talked about that in
"The Addicted Brain."
LISA GARR: Yes.
And for grieving, by the
way, you have to grieve.
You know, you take an
SSRI, it'll take edge off.
But it can take off
more than the edge.
I mean, I had a
women who said she
couldn't cry at her
mother's funeral
because she was on an SSRI.
LISA GARR: Wow.
And that's not good.
You want to be able
to feel your feelings.
LISA GARR: Mm-hm.
[INAUDIBLE] the process.
We're going to take a
look at another video here
that goes back
into the addictions
and "The Addictive Brain" book.
Take a look.
Can you give me an
idea of how someone
goes about treating addiction?
Addiction has been treated
kind of as a stepchild
of psychiatry.
People look on addicts as being
weak, poor moral character.
If they would just get it
together, use self-control.
And I have to say, in a way, the
12 step programs kind of feed
into that.
And at the same
time, I have to say,
I do appreciate AA and the
other 12 step programs,
because they really
do help people
have a support structure.
I think that's
extremely important.
But what they've missed is that
there's a biochemical component
to addiction.
Now Bill W. knew that.
He had contact
with Abram Hoffer.
And Abram Hoffer told
him about what's called
orthomolecular psychiatry.
That is, using nutrients.
So he was onto it.
Bill W. was onto it, but
AA never adopted that.
So you go to an AA meeting--
so I hear, because I haven't
actually been to one-- but
I know people are smoking,
drinking coffee, eating
cake and cookies,
all the bad stuff, right?
Why?
Not because they're bad
people or stupid or weak,
but because their brain
chemistry's out of whack.
So the very same
things that they're
turning to now-- the sugar, the
caffeine, the whatever it is
that they're using,
the cigarettes--
are to raise their
dopamine level.
And that's the reason why
they had their addiction
in the first place, because
their dopamine level
and their other brain
chemicals were out of balance.
So if you can help
someone rearrange
their neurotransmitters and
replenish the deficiencies,
the cravings are
going to go away.
And that's just what I do.
When I'm seeing patients
and they're addicted,
I'll give them tyrosine,
phenylalanine, glutamine.
Those are my favorites
in terms of amino acids
for treating these situations.
There's also an herb
called kudzu, K-U-D-Z-U,
that really does help to
metabolize alcohol and to stop
the alcohol cravings.
And what I even developed--
what happened was out
of self-defense, I actually
developed a set of products
of Brain Recovery AM
and Brain Recovery PM,
because people in recovery, when
they're dealing with addiction,
it's really hard
for them to figure
out how to count their pills.
And I could take
this in the morning,
and then I take one of
these and three of these,
and they get confused
because they don't
have their full brain function.
So I made it very simple.
I have a morning packet.
Take a packet with breakfast,
a packet with dinner.
And there are
multivitamins in both.
There's fish oil in
both, because you
need the essential fatty
acids for your brain.
There's amino acids in both,
and there's blood sugar
balancing products in both.
So when you've taken the two
packets, what you've done
is help to rebalance your brain
chemistry so that the cravings
are going to go away.
And when someone's addicted,
they're not a bad, weak person.
They are deficient.
And if we can give them what
they need-- and very often,
they're low blood sugar as well.
So they have to make sure to eat
the appropriate-- eat probably
three to five meals a day, make
sure they have enough chromium
and enough glutamine to help
balance their blood sugar,
and to eat good,
healthful foods.
Stay away from the bad
stuff, because that's
only going to perpetuate
the addiction cycle.
And if you eat well,
that goes a long way
toward even mitigating
the cravings
and to restoring
your brain chemistry
to where it should be.
So basically, what
you're saying is
you need to go a lot
further than just belonging
to an organization
where you are there
with a number of
other people who
are fighting the same problem.
You need the help to be
able to hopefully overcome
the craving and these other
things that are really
very prevalent, but are replaced
by the coffee and things
like that.
-The coffee and doughnuts.
And I would love to
speak at AA programs.
I think they've
done a fabulous job
in taking people--
taking people in, giving
them support, having sponsors.
And I've seen the
really positive effect.
But this one piece would
be so important, so
vital, to introduce the role of
nutrition, of eating properly,
taking out the bad stuff and
adding in the good stuff,
like my brain recovery
packets or anything like it.
Just look at the ingredients
and get an equivalent somewhere.
All right.
So I promised that we were going
to talk about hormonal issues,
which I know you are a great
expert in, and how to-- I mean,
hormones can be so
confusing for women.
And for the men who
have women that are
confused about the hormones.
I mean, sometimes they
play tricks with your mind,
and you don't know
how you are or why
you are reacting
in a certain way,
and it's really the
hormones talking.
And the men go, what is--
what happened to her?
HYLA CASS: Where did she go?
Where did she go?
Who is this?
And you're like,
what do you mean?
Who is this imposter?
She looks like her, but I know.
[LAUGH]
She's not who I married.
And the men know exactly
what we're talking about.
Yes.
I mean, really female--
HYLA CASS: Chemistry.
It's amazing what happens.
Your hormones shift.
And women's hormones shift.
We have cycles, and
that's how it is.
But you don't have to suffer
from these hormonal shifts.
What I'm saying is--
LISA GARR: News flash.
[LAUGH]
-News flash.
Not a hot flash.
A news flash.
[LAUGH]
So when-- PMS is rampant, right?
And it's worse
than it used to be.
Why?
The usual.
Our nutrition's terrible.
LISA GARR: Stress.
You know, when you're
drinking Cokes and caffeine
and eating sugar, what do
you think's going to happen?
Your hormones are going
to be out of whack.
LISA GARR: Oh, really?
Why?
Because your hormones,
just like we were talking
about neurotransmitters,
they need carbohydrates,
proteins, fats, you know?
You need all this good
stuff to make hormones.
And when we don't
have it, when we're
making hormones out of nothing,
there's a real problem.
And we have a lot of
stress, what happens?
The raw materials are going
to make the stress hormones,
and they're not going to
make the female hormones.
LISA GARR: OK.
OK.
So--
-So we have a problem.
However, it's solvable.
One of the things--
isn't that nice?
LISA GARR: I love that.
-Isn't that nice?
I have solutions.
I have a solution for you.
PMS, so often with PMS,
women are low in magnesium.
Simple.
Because when you're stressed,
your magnesium goes south.
Your B6 goes south.
Vitamin B6 and magnesium
are brilliant for PMS.
And then there's
herbs that we can
use, specific herbs for PMS.
And I've put together
some formulas for PMS
because-- and of
necessity for a lot
of wonderful young women
who, during PMS time,
turn into witches.
And they don't like it either.
So giving them magnesium,
fish oil, evening
primrose oil, by PMS balance
and watching their diet,
and exercising.
Makes a tremendous difference.
It's like-- chu!
It's a total switch.
LISA GARR: It's
a restart button.
It's a restart.
And if that-- sometimes we
have to tweak it even more
and add a little progesterone.
Progesterone's very safe.
You use natural progesterone.
LISA GARR: And your body
produces progesterone anyway,
but why does that go
down when you're--
Well, sometimes we have low
progesterone, particularly
when there's a lot of stress.
Because instead of
making progesterone,
your body's making cortisol.
LISA GARR: Ah.
So it starts making--
So it's called
the cortisol steal.
Cortisol is stealing
progesterone.
And we need progesterone.
LISA GARR: What
about testosterone?
Do women produce
testosterone as well?
Yes.
We make it in the
adrenal glands.
And viva testosterone,
because it helps with libido.
We need estrogen, progesterone,
and testosterone for libido.
We need it all.
LISA GARR: Huh.
And so if the adrenals
are shot and if you're
drinking a lot of
caffeine and so forth,
and so your
progesterone is shot,
that's why women have
such bad experiences
where they're going through
menstrual cycles, menopause.
Is that what a hot flash is?
Is it created from
an out of balance--
HYLA CASS: Well, it's
from out of balance.
But what you're
describing, you end up
with low libido, irritability,
depression, brain fog.
You're just not
operating properly.
LISA GARR: And then
you reach for the SSRI.
I see.
-There you go.
You go to your doc, and, oh.
SSRI.
Without even thinking,
these docs are-- I mean,
I have such a thing about this.
I mean, I just really
appreciate the opportunity to be
able to talk here about this--
LISA GARR: It's important.
--and have your support.
Because these poor
women, they're on SSRIs.
What do you think SSRIs do
to your libido, by the way?
Oh, right.
That's one of the
big side effects.
Mm-hm.
HYLA CASS: No libido.
The other thing that
really kills you
libido, oral contraceptives.
LISA GARR: Does it really?
And there's a new
study that came out
that showed the dangers of
oral contraceptives-- finally,
finally, finally--
that really shows
that they're carcinogenic.
LISA GARR: Oh, wow.
That the progestin in them--
this is not progesterone.
It's progestin,
since it's synthetic.
Definitively.
But they give that to young
girls to solve acne problems.
HYLA CASS: Oh, right.
Yeah.
Hey.
How about that?
-Oh.
-Pretty wacky.
-Yeah.
It's dangerous.
I mean, and now-- I
mean, we're just--
I have such a freedom
to talk with you
about different things.
HYLA CASS: I know.
I like this.
As we're going into--
OK, I've got to get back
to the hot flash conversation.
What is that?
What are hot flashes?
HYLA CASS: So hot flashes
are PMS on steroids,
or without steroids.
You don't have enough steroids.
But what happens when you
have hot flashes is your--
your hormones have gone south.
You're not making
enough progesterone.
You're having
anovulatory cycles, which
means no ovulation with age.
You've kind of run out
of-- run out of eggs
or run out of eggs
that are really
functioning properly, and
creating a corpus luteum that
makes progesterone.
LISA GARR: OK.
So you're not
making progesterone.
So what happens, it's like
having PMS all month long.
And it's horrible.
And then what's called
vasomotor instability,
it means that your blood
rushes to your face,
and you have flashes and
sweats, and you can't sleep
at night, and all of that.
LISA GARR: Right.
Usually if you give some
progesterone-- and this
is wonderful.
Progesterone will
often do the trick.
Sometimes you have to
add in some estrogen
and-- for the testosterone.
But actually, you
know, before all
that, I'll often just
start off with using
a PMS formula or a menopause
formula, or some FemmePhase.
And these are
formulas that are very
special herbal
formulas, specifically
for these purposes.
LISA GARR: What's in them?
Like an example.
A bunch of Chinese herbs.
I mean, unpronounceable
Chinese herbs.
And particularly, I
like FemmePhase a lot
because I've had
a number of women
who I've given them that first.
Because there's no point going
on pharmaceutical hormones.
The natural hormones are--
still, they're pharmaceutical,
and they're still hormones.
So if we can avoid
going on hormones,
like, delay it a little, and use
the natural-- the herbs first.
So what is the difference
between bioidentical hormones
and the hormone
replacement therapy?
Actually, some of the hormone
replacement therapy that you
get from conventional
pharmacies actually is
pretty, sort of bioidentical.
LISA GARR: OK.
Like, Estrace is the
same as estradiol.
But it doesn't have
the estriol in it.
So when I'm prescribing
hormones for women-- see,
I do a lot of things.
I do this psychiatric
part, which is
the neurotransmitter support.
But I'm also dealing
with hormones,
and you can't really--
it's the whole body.
I've got to treat
the whole person.
So you take the--
I check for levels.
So we can do a saliva test or
a blood test or a urine test
to check the hormone levels.
And then give these
bioidentical hormones.
And the difference
is that they're
tailored to the individual.
So I look and see
what-- OK, so what's
the proportion of
the various hormones,
and how do we replace them?
Do you need more progesterone?
Do you need more estrogen?
More testosterone?
DHEA.
That's an adrenal hormone.
So we do all that.
I do that.
I prescribe it.
And then I can tweak it.
Whereas from the pharmacy,
it's not quite one size
fits all, because there
are different dosages.
But they're not
made-- for example,
Biest is made for
estriol and estradiol,
two different estrogens.
Whereas the
pharmaceutical, regular,
conventional is just estradiol.
So you deal with hormones and
brain balance and so forth.
But I mean, the people
that come and see you
are usually quite
out of balance.
So how do you deal with that?
I mean, people coming
to you all day long
that feel like they're crazy.
[LAUGH]
HYLA CASS: Oh, I know.
Isn't that-- it's kind of--
LISA GARR: You must
have a lot of patience.
[LAUGH]
Patience and patients.
Yep.
Well, the thing is
that people feel
crazy because their
hormones are out of whack,
their neurotransmitters
are out of whack.
So much is not working.
But the solution can
be fairly simple.
That's the good news.
LISA GARR: Oh, that's great.
I mean, it looks
like, oh my God.
I'm a wreck.
What's going to happen?
But the truth is that
when you change your diet
and you begin to exercise,
begin to sleep better
and make a few
tweaks, very often,
that will just set you
on the path of being OK.
Like, in "8 Weeks
to Vibrant Health,"
I put people on this
very-- what I think
is a very normal program.
Take out the bad stuff,
eat the good stuff,
do a really simple detox.
You don't have to be extreme.
You're going to get rid of the
bad foods, eat the good foods.
And just-- it really makes an
enormous change very quickly.
LISA GARR: And then you add
in various different things.
HYLA CASS: Then I add in.
And I do lab testing.
That's part of my practice.
So I'll test for
hormones, I'll test
for vitamin and mineral levels.
Many things.
I'll test for heavy metals.
Because boy, that's a
whole other problem.
I also-- what I love about
you is that you really empower
the patient to be their
own doctor, in a way,
your own health detective
is what you say.
And you empower people to learn.
Because these are
our bodies, and we
are constantly changing our
chemistry inside of our bodies.
It's not going to stay the same.
We wish.
But it's going to change.
HYLA CASS: Isn't that something?
Yeah, I know.
So anyway, we have a
video here with Dr. Cass.
Take a look at her in action.
When we have adrenal stress,
one of things that we use
up a lot are the B vitamins.
So it's important to have a good
supply of B vitamins, all the B
vitamins, particularly vitamin
B5, which is pantothenic acid.
So you want the B vitamins.
Magnesium.
Magnesium gets
used up in stress.
You want to make sure that
you have 200 to 400 milligrams
daily of magnesium to replenish
what you're losing with stress.
And on top of that,
there are these
wonderful herbal compounds
called adaptogens,
which help us to adapt.
So they support
the adrenal glands.
There are adaptogens that
are herbal products that
come from various traditional
medicines that have been used
for centuries to help us
restore the adrenal glands,
to help regulate our adrenal
hormones, our blood pressure,
and our feeling of stress.
There's ashwagandha,
which is Ayurvedic.
There's ginseng, which is
generally a Siberian ginseng
or eleuthero.
That's most common
one that's used.
Rhodiola root,
also from Siberia.
Mushroom.
Reishi mushroom is
a good adaptogen.
So all of this adaptogens
are very useful for helping
to restore adrenal function.
So we have that fight or flight
response when we need it.
And then on top of that,
there's some excellent compounds
like phosphatidylserine, which
feeds the brain in handling
the stress response,
because there's also
a large mental component to it.
So we want to be-- we
want to be in shape.
We want to be mentally in shape.
So that's meditation,
visualization,
calming-- the calming response.
We want to do yoga.
Exercise.
Aerobics.
That's a great stress reliever.
You want to take
adaptogens, B vitamins,
along with a multivitamin,
and phosphatidylserine
and other compounds that
will help feed the brain.
You have so much information.
HYLA CASS: We could
do a lot of shows.
We're drawing so much out
of you today, so thank you.
So, all right.
So we talked a little
bit about-- well,
we've talked about everything.
We've talked about addictions
and adaptogens and adrenals,
and so forth.
Thyroid.
Big point.
A lot of people are under
diagnosed with thyroid issues.
How would one know that they
have low or high thyroid?
So often, women are feeling
tired, cold, can't lose weight.
Their hair's thinning.
The skin's dry.
They're constipated.
Their eyebrows are thinning.
And they might know even
that it could be thyroid.
And they go to their doctor,
and their doctor does some lab
tests and says, you're normal.
Old story.
And they're not.
The standards that docs
are using-- if they test it
all-- they're not
really correct.
They're using too big a
range of what is normal,
and they're allowing people
that really do have-- they
say, oh, you're borderline.
Let's wait.
No, no, you're not borderline.
If you're borderline,
you're hypothyroid.
And there's such
good ways to help it.
And I've had women-- like, just
they were just so grateful.
They said, it's like someone
turned on the lights.
LISA GARR: Yes.
You know, I've been
diagnosed low thyroid.
I've said, clearly
you're low thyroid.
Put them on, like, a quarter
of a grain of Nature-Throid,
a half a grain of Nature-Throid.
Tiny little dose,
and the lights go on.
And it's like, they can live.
They can function again.
Yeah.
I mean, it is quite--
if you can't get out
of bed in the morning, all those
types of things that you just
think are normal,
everyday stressors
and that causes stress--
but that's really
interesting what you said.
So doctors, even if
they do a full panel,
and even if they put that--
HYLA CASS: They don't
do a full panel.
They don't.
They don't do the full panel.
And they don't really
specifically test for the TSH.
And the range is too big when
they do test for the TSH.
HYLA CASS: Yeah.
They'll test for TSH.
I'll grant that.
But I don't want a TSH over two.
And in "8 Weeks to
Vibrant Health,"
I really cover that
very carefully.
And also in my "8 Weeks
to Vibrant Health"
coaching package, I cover that.
There's a whole
section on thyroid,
because it's so, so important.
You want your thyroid,
your TSH, to be under two.
But you also want
to measure free T3
and free T4 to see
how that's working,
because T4 converts to T3.
I don't get too
technical, but that's
a way to see what's really
working and what's missing.
I mean, if you're
low in selenium,
you won't convert T4
to T3, the active form.
So your whole issue
might be low selenium.
It could be low iodine.
It could be a simple solution.
But your regular doc isn't
going to look for that.
LISA GARR: Well,
you also coach us
through that in the "8 Weeks
to Vibrant Health" program
on how to request specific
tests from your doctor.
You can go to a lab anywhere.
You can actually go back
and read through the results
and compare notes to
the look and say, look.
This is what I've discovered.
I mean, it's so empowering.
I did this.
I mean, I know that this is
possible because I did it.
And you told me what to
test for, and I said, look.
This is the result. And I
compared it to the charts,
and I went, wow.
I am really low in this.
And you helped me out
in an amazing way.
But it's empowering
for the patient,
and it's relatively easy to do.
And when-- I mean, I did
that probably five years ago,
and I remember it.
Because it empowered me.
Yeah The other
part of low thyroid
is Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
LISA GARR: Right.
So common.
It's an autoimmune
reaction to your thyroid.
And that-- the root cause, very
often, is gluten sensitivity,
and that's a whole
other program.
LISA GARR: And I
figured that out too.
It's another program.
It's great.
But gluten sensitivity.
Yes.
We could do five shows
off of all the information
you gave us today.
I thank you so much.
Oh, this has been so much fun.
I love sharing this information,
and especially with you,
because you just--
I bring it out
of you, but you're
a fountain of information,
because I know it's in there.
HYLA CASS: Yeah, thanks.
Thank you so much, Dr. Cass.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Dr. Hyla Cass or
share it with friends,
go to gaiamtv.com for
thought provoking interviews
and inspirational
films and so much more.
Please sign up for a free
trial at gaiamtv.com today.
Until next time, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[THEME MUSIC]